Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger today would
have a look at one of the many remarkable
contributions made to number theory by the great
Carl Frederick Gauss a champion of mathematics
who lived from 1777 to 1855 sometimes called the
Prince of mathematics and certainly one of the
greatest mathematicians of modern times he almost
single-handedly reconfigured number theory at our
tender age of 21 by this monumental book called
disk we see oneis arithmetic I which gave all
kinds of new directions for the subject and part
of that reconfiguration was this introduction of
modular arithmetic that I'm going to learn about
today which is a very useful and a valuable tool
to understand divisibility which has many modern
applications to modern cryptography for example
an Internet Security okay so modular arithmetic
is a technology for studying the arithmetic of
remainders with respect to a fixed number M called
the modulus so basically we're looking at numbers
from the point of view of one particular number
M and basically concentrating on the remainders
that other numbers make with respect to that fixed
modulus M so if we divide a natural number n by
this fixed modulus M then we were going to get
a remainder R and that remainder R can be any
number from 0 up to M it can include 0 but that's
a special case when M actually divides n but it
can't quite be M because if the remainder was
a more bigger then we could subtract another M
from it so it wouldn't be the smallest remainder
so this remainder R is something that we give a
special name to so we say that n mod M is our
that's what this terminology means it's telling
us what the remainder is when we divide n by M so
to motivate this let's return to this question of
whether 13 divides ed or not that is 10 triangle
10 plus 23 so another way of saying that is what
is the remainder when you do divide Z by 13
here is Zed this tower of 10/10 stacked on
top of each other plus 23 and we should be aware
that this question already is a little bit shaky
because it's assuming that we have extended our
arithmetic up to this very lofty level where Zed
lives ok that's already a little bit problematic
so we're working in some kind of Numb expression
world but we haven't actually been very precise
about what that actually means so let's put that
kind of problem aside and let's just play around
so let's investigate this question as you might
have done by just looking at powers of 10 very
simple modest powers of 10 in terms of what are
their remainders when you divide them by 13 so
it's a very profitable kind of investigation so if
we take 10-month 13 well that's 10 that's telling
us that if we divide 10 by 13 the remainder is 10
how about 10 squared mod 13 now it's a question
of dividing a hundred by 13 and over here I've
done that so 100 divided by 13 well we can take
seven of them seven 13s is 91 and that'll give
us a remainder of nine telling us that 10 squared
mod 13 is 9 that's the remainder that you get when
you do by 10 squared by 13 and then you can check
that 10 cubed Mod 13 is 12 and you might like to
stop the video and as a little exercise first of
all check this one here and see if you can see the
pattern how does this how does this continue if
we keep on going increasing the as of 10:00 and
always asking what is the remainder when we divide
this bigger bigger power of 10 by say 13 so we're
fixing 13 that's our modulus M we're interested
in what are their majors when we divide higher
and higher powers of 10 by that modulus it's a
good question well with explored alright let me
remind you of some notation when we divide one
number by the other if we divide a hundred by 13
as we've just done then we get a quotient of seven
so 13 goes into 100 seven times and then there's a
remainder of nine we say that 13 the thing that
we're dividing by is called the divisor so they
have the divisor here's the quotient and there's
the remainder so this expresses completely that
arithmetic operation of long division that we've
done okay so posed that we want to do the same
thing for a thousand we want to see what happens
when you divide a thousand by thirteen so we could
again do a long division okay but something else
that we could do is we could take the equation
that we've just got and multiplied by ten this may
be a little bit clever okay so we multiply this
equation by 10 what do we get we get 1,000 equals
70 times 13 we'll write it that way plus 90 okay
that's good because that's a multiple of 13 so now
we're faced with a simpler problem of expressing
90 as a bunch of multiples of 13 it's actually 6
times 13 that's 78 plus a remainder of 12 and so
now if we put these two together we get that it's
equal to 76 times 13 plus 12 so we've managed to
get this without actually doing the long division
that's a good idea so it let's go up one step if
we go up one step to the next power of 10 we're
gonna just multiply this one by ten and we'll get
10,000 is 760 times 13 plus 120 and again what
we're gonna do is we're going to express this
some multiple of 13 okay this is some multiple
30 and I could write 760 but let me just write
down question mark meaning that there's something
there but I don't really care what it is okay and
I'm going to express 120 as 9 times 13 which is
a hundred and 117 117 plus a remainder of 3 and
then I'm going to write this as something times 13
plus 3 so however many 13s I had here I'm adding
it to a certain number of other 13s over here I'm
getting a certain multiple of 13 and I'm not going
to pay much attention to what that multiple
actually is because the only thing I'm really
interested in is this plus 3 the remainder this is
sort of the the idea of modular arithmetic that we
start focusing on the remainder and start actually
ignoring the quotient we know that there's some
number there but the point is we don't really care
that much what it is because if we go to the next
step and multiply by 10 again then the effect is
that over here we can get 100,000 and this thing
here is a multiple of 13 when we multiply that by
10 that's going to be some other multiple of 13
so we don't actually need to calculate what that
multiple is we do have to calculate this this is
going to turn into 30 when we multiplied by 10
and then that 30 is going to be expressed as 26
which is 2 times 13 plus 4 and the 2 times 13 can
be lumped together with however many 13s we had
here to get some new unknown multiple of 13 with
a remainder of 4 so we're kind of cheating here in
a way that we're sort of forgetting or ignoring
part of these equations so Gauss realized that
it's it's possible to do this that when we're
working our way through these powers of 10 say
and looking at the remainders we can very easily
get away with just not knowing what these various
quotients are at each stage so well we've just
established in the last slide is that 10 to the
5th is some unknown multiple of 13 plus 4 let's
carry on in this same direction if we multiply
this equation by 10 we get 10 to the 6 is some
other multiple of 13 plus 40 the 14 can be written
as you divide it by 13 in our minds it's 3 times
13 which is 39 plus 1 and then the 3 times 13 can
be combined with this number of 13s for another
unknown number of 13s and we should note that
this question mark that's appearing here does not
necessarily represent the same unknown number as
this question mark represents so the question
mark just means some unknown quantity for us
right now the point is that it's some multiple of
13 plus 1 when we multiply then by 10 we get that
10 to the 7 is some multiple of 13 plus 10 and
then when we multiply by 10 again the 10 becomes
a hundred which can then be written as 91 plus
9 and we get a 9 these are 91 at 7 times 13 so
it meets up with these ones here at the next stage
we have to multiply the 9 by 10 we get 90 and then
we saw that we could peel 6 times 13 away from 90
that's a 78 leaving a remainder of 12 and in fact
the pattern repeats what we gotten previously
repeats the 12 becomes 120 which is 117 times
3 so we can peel off the 9 times 13 and then we
multiply by 10 we get a 30 again which gives us
a 4 we multiply by 10 we get 40 which gives us a
1 so the pattern is repeating you can see it right
here it's 1 remainder then 10 and then 9 and then
12 and then 3 and then 4 and then 1 and then we're
back exactly this situation right this thing here
looks exactly like this thing does except that the
multiples might be different but we don't care
about the multiples so the essential form is the
same this is really though the motivating kind
of Rea motivating reason for establishing this
modular kind of notation okay so now that we have
a pattern of the remainders four powers of ten let
me give you this exercise again to see if you
can then get a little bit closer to finding Zed
ma 13 can you Jack this up now to finding out
what exactly this remainder is alright so now
let's set up this modular arithmetic we're gonna
start with a fixed natural number M and that's
called the modulus and we'll want that number
to be bigger than or equal to one now these
other numbers KL and then that we're going to be
talking about they're all from natural numbers
so that's sort of the default realm that we're
talking about so the definition is this that K
equals L but it's a funny equal equal sign with
three bars not two and we read it by saying K is
congruent to L mod M but it's a kind of equality
now this means it means the following it means
that K mod M equals L mod app and I remind
you that means that the remainder that you
get when you divide K by M equals the remainder
that you get when you divide L by M so in other
words K and they'll have the same remainder when
divided by M that's what k congruent to L mod M
means so for example a hundred is congruent to 10
to the eighth mod 13 because both of them have a
remainder of 9 when divided by 13 we saw that
100 mod 13 was nine and ten to the eighth Mod
13 is nine so 110 'they have the same remainder
when you divide them by 13 namely nine and so we
say that these two are congruent mod 13 congruent
mod 13 that's what we say to denote this modular
kind of equality so here's another example so
here's some numbers which are all congruent mod
seven so we're changing our modulus now from
13 to 7 okay so we're looking at numbers mod
7 that means we're only really interested in
the remainders when you divide by 7 so when
we're looking mod 7 we only care about what's the
remainder when we divide by 7 so the remainder of
10 when we divide by 7 is 3 the remainder of 3
when we divide by 7 is 3 through the remainder
of 17 and of 24 and of 31 when we divide by 7
or all 3 so all of these numbers are congruent
mod 7 and notice that say these two are differing
by 7 in this case and these differ by 14 which is
a multiple 7 he's different by 7 these differ by
14 here's another example it doesn't have to be
a prime so mod 6 if we're working mod 6 we're
interested in the remainders that you get when
you divide by 6 in that case 0 is congruent to 6
because 6 is divisible by 6 the remainder is 0 12
if you divide that by 6 you also get a remainder
of 0 18 when you divide by 6 you get a remainder
of 0 24 also so the things that are congruent to 0
mod 6 look like they're just multiples of 6 here's
another example maybe a kind of trivial example
when we're considering mod 1 so we did allow our
modulus to be 1 so what happens if we're working
mod 1 well in that case every number is divisible
by 1 the remainder when you divide 4 by 1 is 0 so
all numbers are congruent to 0 mod 1 that means
they all leave a remainder of 0 when divided
by 1 and here's another example 3 3 4 1 7 0 is
congruent to 3 3 4 1 7 8 mod 8 how do we know
that well because this number and this number
only differ by eight okay so actually I don't
know what the remainder is what I divide this
by eight but I do know that the remainder that I
get when I divide this by eight is going to be the
same as the remainder that I get when I divide
this by eight because these two only differ by
eight so they're congruent mod eight now here's
another way of thinking about this fundamental
definition of things being congruent mod M so
let's say M K and L are all natural numbers and
let's suppose for the convenience that K is less
than or equal to L then K is congruent to L ma M
is precisely the same as M dividing L minus K if
the difference between K and L this L minus K is
divisible by M then these things are congruent
and conversely if these two things are congruent
then their difference is divided by m and why do
I insist that K is less than or equal to L here
well it's just so that we're still working in the
realm of natural numbers I haven't really defined
things for integers yet in fact strictly speaking
this is really independent of having a arithmetic
for integers okay it's just a natural number
arithmetic that's all what we need here so I
just want to be a little bit careful when you're
subtracting with natural numbers you have to be
careful that you don't go outside the bounds
of natural numbers and we make sure that by
just requiring that this number be bigger than or
equal to this number in order that this thing is
still a natural number and that's a little bit of
a subtlety that appears in the proof here it's a
little bit of an artificial subtlety but it okay
so here's the proof so suppose that say K is some
multiple of M say n1 times M plus a remainder
of r1 this is really the remainder so the room
between 0 & M not equal to M and similar to L say
is n 2 times M plus the remainder R to R 2 also
having the same form less than M okay so what does
it mean for K to be congruent to L naught m it
simply means that these two remainders are equal
so this happens precisely when the remainders R 1
and R 2 are equal that's our previous definition
of what this means okay on the other hand if we
look at L minus K over here so the L minus K over
here well it's this number the minus this number
okay so when is this going to be divisible by M
well here's a multiple of M and here's a multiple
of M and here we have R 1 minus R 2 sort of
left over so this is going to be divisible
by M precisely when R 1 equals R 2 because R 1
and R 2 are less than M so there's no way that
a difference between them can be multiple of them
unless that multiple is 0 so as an exercise please
check this claim just go through the argument
actually strictly speaking you have to look at
a couple of different cases depending on the
relative sizes of R 1 and R 2 because we don't
know whether R 1 is bigger than R 2 or the other
way around at this point here ok so the moral of
the story is that these two notions of congruence
are really the same we can say that K is congruent
to L mod M means that the remainders when you
divide Pam are equal or another way of saying
it equally valid equally way valid way of thinking
about it is that the difference between these two
numbers is divisible by M and sometimes this is
taken to be the definition of what this means
that's perfectly valid now this was of course a
number theory I would probably have to go a little
bit slower and in particular especially with this
theorem here which is a core result in the subject
you have to have a close look at the proof I'm
not going to go through the proof but they are
great exercises for you to try to prove these
various things so the setup is that we have a
bunch of natural numbers say K 1 and K 2 and L 1
and L 2 and M which will be our modulus M is going
to be a bigger than equal to 1 maybe they didn't
say that let's assume M is bigger than equal to 1
ok let's suppose that K 1 is congruent to L 1 mod
M and that K 2 is congruent to L 2 mod n that's
our starting point then the sum K 1 plus K 2 is
congruent to L 1 plus L 2 mod M and the product
K 1 times K 2 is congruent to l1 times l2 mod M
there are these are lovely little exercises that
you can use using that last proposition it's
a very nice way of proving it so for example
let's have a look at M being 13 our modulus is M
equals 13 then hundred is congruent to 9 mod 13
we've seen that we also calculated that a thousand
is congruent to twelve mod 13 so according to this
theorem that means that if we take a hundred
and we add it to a thousand so giving us one
thousand one hundred then that's going to be
congruent to the sum of nine and twelve which
is 21 now 21 is congruent to eight because if you
subtract a multiple of 13 you get eight and so we
see that one thousand one hundred can be said
to be congruent to eight mod 13 on the other
hand if we multiply these two numbers we get a
hundred thousand on the left and that should be
then congruent to the product of nine times 12
which is 108 and we can sort of simplify that
mod 13 by taking multiples of 13 out of here so
104 is eight times this so if we take eight times
13 out that's 100 or out then this 108 becomes 4
so 108 is congruent to 4 that means that 100,000
is congruent to for my 13 you can check that's
the result that we got earlier okay so a related
theorem to the one we've just proven in fact a
consequence of it is this very pleasant thing
here that if K is congruent to L bought em then
K to the N is congruent to L to the N mod M for
any natural number n you can see I hope that
that's sort of a consequence of the previous
one because we apply that multiplicative property
to the equations case congruent to Elm on M and
the same equation case congruent to l ma I'm
just multiply those two then we get K square
just congruent to l squared and if we multiply by
the same equation we get K cubed is congruent to
L cubed and so on okay so as an exercise to prove
these both of these theorems so let's illustrate
this one here so 100 is congruent to 9 Mod 13
we've had that several times so applying this
say 2n equals 2 but tell us that 100 squared is
congruent to 9 squared or 81 but 81 is congruent
to 3 because we can take out 78 which is 6 times
13 and so we get 100 squared is congruent to 3
we could take this equation and apply the same
kind of reasoning we could square both sides 100
squared squared is 100 to the fourth 3 squared is
just 9 so we get very quickly that 100 to the 4th
is congruent to 9 Mod 13 if we Square this one
again then we get that 100 to the 8 is the same
as 9 squared which is 81 which we've already seen
is congruent 3 mod 13 why using these theorems we
can very quickly prove things that otherwise would
require quite a few steps to get up to now this is
a very efficient way of deducing this relatively
high power of 100 what its remainder is ma 13
its remainder when you divide 100 to the eighth
by 13 that remainder is 3 say if we square this
again we get a hundred to the 16 is congruent to
9 Mar 13 June yes of Gauss two to realize that we
can exploit the separation of quotients with
remainders in this very pleasant and natural
but clever way okay but the subject actually
has ties this is a language to talking about
divisibility but that subject has been around
for a lot longer than Gauss so even back in the
earlier days in this 16th 17th and 18th centuries
we had fir Mott and that Euler coming up with very
important results that are pleasantly stated in
this language but actually predated and so that's
what we're going to look at in our next video we
look at two famous theorems of Vermont and Euler
which address this kind of issue of what happens
to powers of a number when you look at it from
the point of view of a fixed modulus what happens
to powers of 10 Mod 13 say as the power keeps on
going higher and higher and higher turns out that
there's a very pleasant pattern that depends well
on the number that you've chosen to take powers
of but also on the modulus in an interesting
way so we'll discuss that it's a topic that
has lots of applications to a modern internet
security actually I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening